Hi, this is Scott. I
really appreciate our sponsors because
they make the show possible.
Today's show is sponsored by
developer express, become a UI
superhero with dev express controls
and libraries. Deliver elegant.net solutions
that address customer needs today
by leveraging your existing knowledge,
you can build next generation
touch enabled solutions for tomorrow,
you can download your free
30 day trial@dxdothanselminutes.com. That's dx.hanselminutes.com
From hanselminutes.com. It's Hansel minutes,
a weekly discussion with web
developer and technologist Scott Hanselman.
This is Lawrence Ryan announcing Sure.
Number 502. In this episode,
Scott talks with Julia Sweetland
about a program designed to
provide keyboard control, mouse control
and speech to people with
ms. Motor and speech limitations.
Hi, this is Scott Hanselman.
This is another episode of
Hansel minutes today. I'm talking
with Julia Sweetland. He is
the author of optics, and
this blew up the internet
a couple of weeks ago
and is a really, really
exciting example of what the
power of open source can
do. How are you, sir?
I'm very well. Scott, how
are you? I'm brilliant. And
I'm very excited to talk
to you. You kind of
released under the world Opta
key, but it's clear you've
been working on this for
what? Near a year? No,
no. You're much longer. Nearly
four years, I think. Really?
Wow. How did you kind
of was, was it happening
in public because it seemed
like when you released it,
it got on hacker news,
it got on Reddit. It
made quite the splash. Yeah,
that was, that was the
very last thing I did.
So it started, like I
say, about four years ago
and it was originally not
on get hub, not on
anything on the internet, it
was buried on my computer
and backed up to Dropbox,
which is a terrible idea.
And then when I felt
it was sort of ready
and going from prototype ones,
prototypes and feeling a little
bit more rounded. And so
it finally got itself onto
get hub and then another
year or so passed. And
eventually I got the courage
to put it out there
and I posted something on
Reddit. Fantastic. So, so what
is it, what is optica
key and what problem does
it solve? So optically is
a piece of dotnet software
that I've written. It is
designed to allow people to
control their computer fully and
to speak using only your
eyes. So it's really designed
to solve the problem where
people have motor and or
speech limitations. And my target
audience is people with motor
neuron disease or ALS, do
you have this problem? Or
why did you solve this
problem? No, no, I'm, I
don't have this, but I
had an aunt who died
from motor neuron disease a
little bit over four years
ago now. And it's sort
of taught me a few
things. It's my first experience
with the disease. And it's
sort of presented apart from
everything else that was going
on. It presented a very
difficult technical challenge that I
thought I had a chance
of doing better than what,
you know, the solutions that
I could see out there.
It seems like such a
insurmountable technical challenge. I mean,
when you look out into
the software landscape there's products
that cost many, many thousands
of dollars. And when I,
when I hear about assistive
technologies, particularly ones that are
doing things like realtime eye-tracking
I think, wow, there's probably
a whole team of PhDs
working on this. Why do
you think you had the
skills to do that? Honestly,
probably. Cause I didn't know
the scale of the problem
when I started or I
was too stupid to appreciate
how much time it was
going to take me. But
I, I knew at the
beginning that an open source
or a free solution was
a very important thing to
attempt. And I, I sort
of saw the end goal
before I really understood the
scale of the problem and
yeah, I sort of got
something between my teeth early
on and went with it.
I think that's great. I
mean, I hope you didn't
think I was too cheeky
by asking that question, but
I think that so often
we look at a problem.
We go, all right, that's
a solvable yet. Finite interesting
problem. I can spend a
little time on the weekends
working on, and this was
quite a bit larger than
you thought it would be.
Yeah, it got out of
control, but there was also
large periods of time where
I'd either got frustrated and
put the problem down again,
or, you know, some something
else that had come along
and got in the way.
And it wasn't a solid
four years of working on
this and it also, it
broke down into other problems
that I had to solve.
So there's big hardware problems
to, to surmount it before
you even get onto the
software problems. I think one
of the other things that's
interesting about a problem like
this is that it's, it
is somewhat well layered in
the, in the sense that
there are individual kind of
finite modules talking to the
eye tracking hardware and doing
that in a nice, layered
way. That's a problem having
a nice assistive onscreen keyboard.
That's a problem, you know,
there it's very late. Yeah,
absolutely. Yeah. I can't really
break it down into any,
any sets that there have
been thousands of tiny problems
to solve. And then every
time I solve a handful
of them, it's been a
problem with putting them back
together into a way that
makes the solution scalable as
I then try and solve
the next batch of problems.
I mean, it's, it's not
a foreign problem to a
software developer that tends to
be what we do, but
it was just the scale
of doing that rinse and
repeat and, and also the
difficulty of not knowing necessarily
where I was going with
these things. So if I'd
have started this project knowing,
right, this is the end
result, and this is what
it's going to look like,
and this is how the
solution is going to be
laid out. It would have
been much easier, but yeah,
sadly real life isn't like
that, especially when you don't
understand what you're solving most
of the time. So it's
an assistive onscreen keyboard. It
runs on windows. It's written
in.net. Is this a WPF
application? It is. Yeah. Which
is something I'm very comfortable
working with. I liked WPF
tremendously, but unfortunately one of
the big requests that people
have had since I launched
it is can you make
it cross platform? Can I
run it on Linux? Can
I run it on Mac?
And unfortunately, WPF doesn't play
very nicely in those arenas.
So if I had to
do it all over again,
maybe I would have chosen
differently, but I'm, I'm happy
with how it turned out.
Is there a core engine
that isn't UI specific that
you could, you know, with
the advent of.net core being
cross-platform couldn't you write a
cocoa based front end and
have that call into the.net
core and you know, share
some code. Yeah, no, absolutely.
I mean, one thing that
I do want to do
at some point is take
the project as it is,
because it is one project.
If you look at it
on get hub and split
it out and say, well,
actually these components make up
the idea of input to
this system and these components
make up a completely different
project and they handle the
concept of output. And it's
just that middle bit of
how to, to show the
UI and how to do
window manipulation. And there's a
ton of wind 32 API
calls and things like that.
That really need a, I
need to take a good,
hard look at them and
go, well, these don't need
to be in this technology
anymore. Let's, let's do it
in something cross platform. But
the one thing that I
really don't have is time,
and that is a huge
problem to solve. So that
sounds to me like a
bit of a call for
participation from maybe someone who
might be listening, who could
help out. Yeah, no, absolutely.
I mean, that's, that's one
of the most exciting things
about launching this project. It's
been the response of people
out there that I didn't
know existed coming forward and
saying, this is great, right?
Here's what I can do.
Where do you need me?
And I, I didn't expect
that at all. And you
know, two days ago I
got a pull request on
the repository from someone who
had solved the problem of
also completing words with misspelled
characters in it. And it's
something I put up as
an issue on the repo
to, to go back to
at some point, but I
had no idea someone was
even working on it. It's
just, it's fantastic. Getting these
sort of contributions. Yeah. It
is challenging though, to manage
the influx though. And it's
also interesting to point out
the, the kind of the
ratios, if you can imagine
you've got 2000 or so
stars, which are, you know,
people expressing their interest or
our enthusiasm about the project,
you've got 25 issues open
and you've got two open
pull requests and maybe a
total of 30 or so.
So it's a bit of
a long tail, isn't it?
Right. 2000 people expressed extreme
interest, maybe thousands downloaded, but
then a lot of people
complain, which are your issues
and then much, much fewer
actually contribute code. That's true.
Yeah. But what I've been
very lucky with is that
the people who are contributing
to the projects are fantastic.
Like you, you don't get
to work with great people
in, in the workplace where
everyone paid to be there
and do a good job.
So I, I didn't expect
the quality of people where
no one's being paid to
do this. But then again,
you know, maybe I'm thinking
about it backwards because what
I'm attracting are people who
want to be doing this
in their free time. And
that's where you're going to
get quality. Isn't it Slowly
I've found in the open
source space when it comes
to really utilitarian software, whether
it be utilities that everyone
likes or in this case,
assistive technologies, which are by
their nature, absolutely utilitarian people
are much more excited about
helping with these things because
it is probably affecting either
their life or the life
of someone that's close to
them. That's true. Yeah. And
it does seem to be
working. I've like I said,
I'm attracting excellent people and
I'm thoroughly enjoying working with
them at the moment, but
you're still doing this on
your own. I am, yes.
It's a, it's something I
pick up on the bus
on the way to work.
So I've got myself, a
little tablet that I hack
away on for about 45
minutes. And then when I
get home and I've had
dinner and I put my
son to bed, it gets
another hour, maybe two, if
my wife's feeling charitable. Yeah,
it is. It is a
challenge when it's not your
full time job. So I
would be so bold as
to call out to the
audience that not only I
think is Julius looking for
help, but you know, Hey,
if you are a, if
you're Oprah, if Oprah is
listening and you want to
sponsor Julia's to work on
this full time, I'm sure
he would not turn down
a million dollars. No, my
arms are open. That'd be
fantastic. So let's talk a
little bit about the technology
here. I've got a number
of webcams. They're high quality
HD webcams. Can they track
my eyes? Well, it's not
impossible. There are solutions that
are out there, but they
it's not how the industry
solves the problem. And I
think that's very telling of
where the best solution is.
So the way the industry
generally solves this is to
have a dedicated camera that
sits below your screen is
very much akin to a
webcam, but it's specialized in
it. It will only pick
up infrared light. So that's
coupled in the same device
with infrared light sources and
there are multiple ways to
solve this problem. But typically
you produce two or three
light sources and they produce
what are called glints on
your eyeball. So they don't
move. So as your head
moves and your eyes swivels
to look at different parts
of the screen, those glints
are always in the same
spot on your eye and
the camera picks those up
and it picks up your
pupil at the same point.
So it will detect exactly
where your pupil is and
the relative position of your
pupil to these glimpse. And
once you calibrate those movements
to where the user should
be looking on the screen,
you can then start working
out, right? If they move
their eyes to the top
left, this is where on
the screen. That is. And
then the final piece of
the puzzle comes with tracking
their head. So I track
has have what's called a
track box, which is a,
it's a shape that extends
from some way in front
of them to some way
further in front of them.
And as long as your
head's in that, it will
track your head and compensate
for where it thinks your
eyes should be looking now.
Ah, interesting. So this makes
me think of motion tracking.
When someone puts an actual
dot or a blot of
color on someone's face. When
you think about, you know,
like the Lord of the
rings, Gollum person, he, you
know, he's always filmed with
these dots. Those are put
on his face by a
professional. These glints are sent
out by the camera and
then picked up again by
the camera on the way
back in. Yeah. Yeah. That's
right. I suppose it's a
very similar concept. It's just,
they're passively projected onto you
rather than being stuck onto
your face And you don't
see them and you don't
have to think about them.
It's not like a laser
light, like the dot from
a laser pointer. No, no,
it's not quite like that.
You can see the lights
from the infrared stick glows
a sort of soft red
in most of these things,
but no infrared is generally
invisible to our eyes. So
yeah, you can't see, you
can't see it, but they
can see you. So Then
I assume you do some
calibration, like you said, similar
to a pen calibration. Well,
this is all actually handled
by whichever tracker you've chosen
to pair up ticky with.
So I want to draw
the line of where my
software starts and not try
and claim credit for other
people, but that's a good
point. If you, if you
plug in the tracker, they'll
typically have their own piece
of software and together they
will run a calibration routine,
which shows a bunch of
dots on the screen that
move around. And what they
do is they record your
eye moving, following those dots
around. So let's say nine
points in the corners, somewhere
in the middle and it
will, then it will have
a picture of how your
eye moves and how to
translate that. So once it's
got that, it just starts
out putting a series of
X and Y coordinates, which
makes my job a lot
easier because actually what I
do is I just consume
those. So I rely on
the tracker and the tracker
software to do the heavy
lifting for me. And my
job then becomes well. How
do you use that information
in interesting ways? How do
you present a user experience
that allows people to do
things that we would typically
use the mouse and keyboard
for? Ah, interesting. Okay. So
you're getting a stream of
XYZ from the SDK that
sits on the top of
one of the many cameras
that you, you support and
that's their public sdk.net SDK.
And you just consume that.
Yeah, yeah. That's that's broadly
and some trackers have got
a, a.net SDK that you
can call straight into some,
have they stream over sockets.
So you have to open
up a socket and listen
to these things and use
a bit of rejects or
something to break them down
again, into their constituent pieces
of data, or, you know,
every tracker has solved this
problem in a different way,
which is interesting, but also
frustrating and time consuming This
episode of Hansel minutes is
brought to you by brain
tree code for easy online
payments. If you're building a
mobile app and you're searching
for a simple payment solution,
check out brain tree, the
brain tree v.zero SDK makes
it easy to offer multiple
mobile payment types. So you
can start accepting PayPal, Apple
pay Bitcoin, Venmo, credit cards,
and more all with a
single integration, one small snippet
of code. And you're set
up in less than 10
minutes. If you don't have
time, you can give them
a call. They'll even handle
the integration for you and
walk you through it. The
SDK supports seven languages, dotnet
node, Java, Perl, PHP, Python,
and Ruby elegant code clear
documentation to learn more. And
for your first $50,000 in
transactions fee free, go to
brain tree payments.com/hanselman that's Braintree
payments.com/hanselman. So thinking about the
fact that you're doing it
in WPF, there's kind of
two ways you could have
either grabbed it as an
event or you created events,
or you could do it
kind of more pull based
like using reactive extensions, Which
is the road that I
went down. So when I
started this project RX wasn't
wasn't released. So that was
a huge problem that I
had to solve anyway. And
actually, I'm just going to
caveat what I said with
that might not be true
at all, or it may
have been released, but I
was definitely not aware of
it at that point. So
you became aware of it
during the middle of the
project. Yeah, I did. At
some point I knew RX
was out there and can
I, can I plug someone?
Of course. And I actually
went on a, on a
very good course by Lee
Campbell. He did a course
in London. He works for
a company called adaptive and
it was a two day
professional course and we all
sat down in a classroom
and he taught us all
sorts of cool things with
RX. So that, that solidified
what I try to be
teaching myself at that point.
Yeah, absolutely. That's Lee, Ryan Campbell
on Twitter, and he's got
a great blog@leecampbelldotblogspot.com. And he's
been doing reactive extensions since
2010 as I recall. Yep.
He's the guy, he's the
one who, when you start
searching for things, he's either
already answered the question on
stack overflow or you end
up on his intro to
RX blog. That's brilliant. Isn't
that wonderful. How a community
member didn't even realize they
were helping you solve this
problem while you were learning
from them. Yeah. And he's
a very nice guy as
well. Yeah, That's great. So
you have this stream of
XYZ and you then bring
that into your system. You've
got a UI that looks
a lot like the keyboard
that you get with windows,
but it's your own imagination
of that keyboard. You've added
a lot of different things
to it and special icons
and different glyphs to mean
different things. That's right. Yeah.
So I've been through maybe
three different iterations of this
and, and how to solve
the problem of generating speech
in a natural and quick
way. And I've kind of
settled on a standard keyboard
and it's not optimal. I've
had some feedback from people
saying, well, why are you
using a QWERTY layout? You
know, there are much better
ways of doing this. You
could, you could be putting
the letters around in a
circle, has some sort of
radial dial. You could be
using any number of alternate
layouts, which put the most
frequently used letters, more towards
the sensor. These are all
perfectly legitimate pieces of feedback,
but what I'm going for
the whole time is stick
with what people know if
it was me. And this
has always been my test
cases, I've been designing this,
what would I want to
use? And I know a
QWERTY keyboard pretty well. So
that's what I wanted to
use. Yeah. Interesting. That does
bring up the, the question
though, if you wanted to
use it because you had
become disabled at a point
in your life where you
already knew the keyboard versus
someone who might have always
been disabled. Yeah. And the
idea though, some something that
I put into the design
is that the keyboard itself
is just a thing. So
there's something in there called
the keyboard host and he
makes a decision about what's
keyboard to spit out. So
it's based on what keyboard
have you requested. So is
it the letters? Is it,
you know, is it numbers
you want to see? Is
it accented letters or characters,
whatever it is. So there's
that context. There's what, what
language are you currently configured
to use? And then the
last piece of the puzzle
is there's a concept of
keyboard sets. And that allowed
you to say, well, I
want a standard set of
keyboards, or I want a
simplified set of keyboards. Or,
and that's when I was
going to go down a
path of say, well, I
want to radio keyboard, or
I want something else. And
then this keyboard host will,
will make a decision and
spit out the relevant one.
And it's, it's how we're
starting to add support for
French and German. And some
of the more complex non
Latin character-based languages, they've all
got their own layouts and
their own special characters. And
so, you know, it's an
opensource project. If you prefer
a different layout, make it,
it's very easy to plug
in. There's some really great
YouTube videos and some wonderful
animated gifts where you are
holding your hands in the
air and you're showing us
how this works. And I'm
there. As you look at
the different keys, there's a
pie chart that fills over
time. And you, I can
understand where you look at
a key and you wait
for a second for the
pie chart to fill. And
then that might be a,
a level of confidence. You
have that you're looking at
that I, that, that button,
but as you are typing
a full sentence, I see
you looking from key to
key quite quickly. And sometimes
the pie chart only fills
halfway what's going on there.
So the initial selection, if
you were just doing letter
by letter, like you say,
it's filling a pie chart
and it's not just look
at this key for X
number of seconds and it
will select, there's a few
other things going on there
actually. So when you, when
you first push your attention
to a letter, so let's
say the letter H and
you want to type hello.
There's what I call the
lock on period at the
beginning. So that's a period
of time before the key
will react to you. So
that, that allows you to
sort of glance around the
keyboard without every key, suddenly
starting a big animation and
distracting you. So once you've
cleared that period, which is
only something like 50 milliseconds,
so it's, it's generally imperceptible
it then starts registering your
progress. And when that hits
a hundred, it will make
the selection, but say, you
look away during that period
of time. So you're halfway
through selecting the letter H
and something catches your eye,
or you realize you want
to look around and make
sure this is what you
want to be typing. So
there's then a decay period
on each selection. So it
will stick around for a
period of time. And this
is all configurable as well.
And this is built in
because as you, as I
was playing with it over
the generations of this code,
you realize that things just
feel a bit clunky and
I feel a bit, you
know, not quite right, or
they're too difficult to use.
So anyway, that's, what's going
on with a single key
selection, and it's a slow
process. So you don't want
to go H E L
L O. So as you
identified, I do a complete
selection on the age and
then glance E L and
in finished on a complete
selection on the O and
in between what I do
is that I, I capture
everything that I look at.
And then I make a
decision about which keys that
I've touched are going to
be significant. And it broadly
speaking will take the, take
the right letters, but it
might end up with some
extra letters that shouldn't be
there. And it might end
up with some letters that
I've completely missed, because I
didn't give them enough attention
as I was glancing around.
And then I use an
algorithm to match against a
dictionary of known words. So
is this Almost like a
swipe keyboard except for your
eyes? Yeah, exactly. And it's,
it was one of the
first things I thought when
I started designing how this
might work, because I had
a swipe keyboard or a
Swift key keyboard, whichever one
I was using. And I
thought, well, this is excellent.
This is very, very quick.
But I knew at that
point already that your eyes
don't move like that Germany,
they jump in what are
called saccades and fixations. So
as you look around, if
you look at your keyboard
now, and look, H E
L O you barely brushed
the keys in between. So
as you go from the
H to the E, you
will not really look at
the G the FDR, your
eye move so fast as
it makes that movement. So
you actually end up with
really nice H E L
O sort of hits and
it's much cleaner. Whereas when
you're swiping with your finger,
you've got constant pressure and
everything you touch is potentially
important. So those sort of
keyboards have to make decisions
in different ways. So Almost
the edges, not the edges,
the vertexes as you move
from edge to you, you
move edges around. So you,
you go H over to
E and then you immediately
hit you. Don't hit, hit,
you don't sit on E
and hold there. You immediately
do 180 degrees. And you
head back over to, to
L I assume you can
detect that someone is bumped
up against a point and
then come back down, or
how, how quickly can you
do that? Is it the
glance at each and then
come right back down? Or
is it look at E
and hold, hold, hold, and
then come back down. Well,
it's adaptive. So it depends
on how quickly you look
at each key. And then
it makes a decision. It
says, well, what was the
average time of looking at
a key? And so what
do we decide is a
threshold for this was a
conscious look, and this was
something you just brushed up
against by accident, but you've
actually already solved most of
the problem of how the
onscreen keyboards do it with,
with touch. Because like you
say, you do what you
do a one 80 as
you changed direction. And I
believe that's how a lot
of those swipe style keyboards
work, they look for velocity
changes. So when you see
that sort of strong acceleration
or a dink in your
path, something must have happened.
You must've made a decision
that you'd hit what you
wanted. Interesting. And how fast
can you go? Are you
going full speed when you
are doing those gifts and
foot YouTubes, or are you
going halftime? No. So I
knew that I had to
get to a point of
releasing the software. Otherwise I
was never going to get
out there. So this was
at about quarter to midnight
on a work night. So
I was tired. I really
didn't face, I didn't want
to face recording this 10
times. So I said, it's
a very, very modest settings
because I didn't want to
screw it up and do
it 10 times. And the,
I wanted people to understand
what they were looking at
as well. So if I
went too quickly, it would
just be a blur of
all that that looked cool,
but what, what was going
on? So I put it
somewhere in the middle. I've
actually got a user in
Germany who can use the
system about three times faster
than I can, so you
can ramp it all the
way up. Wow. So you
really can move fast if
you need to. Yup, absolutely.
So This is not just
about typing. It's also about
clicking. You've got a great
video where you show someone
using Gmail, which I don't
think is the most accessible
of, of web based emails,
but there's a bit of
zooming and a bit of
a careful clicking. Is it
a little more difficult to
use a mouse than it
is to click around on
a version? Yes, I think
so. I mean, your its
tolerance for making mistakes is
lower because if you hold
in a, in a position
for long enough, it will
execute your action. So you
have to be more precise,
but then the algorithm around
how it decides where you
make your selection for mouse
clicks is tailored differently from
the algorithm around keyboard selections.
So it's a little bit
more tolerant. So it does
stuff involving circles. So it
will work out when you
have locked on to an
area where all of your
points of interest, all of
the places that I think
you're looking for within a
circle of a certain size,
and then it will begin
the selection and its tolerance
will increase. So what you'll
see is, as you see
the mouse moving around on
a screen, the big sort
of cursor animation I do,
you'll see it, it locks
into a position and starts
ticking on a selection. And
the user can actually start
straying a little bit with
their eyes at that point.
So they can relax. Because
up until that point, there's
probably quite a bit of
focus on them to hit
exactly where they want, that
sort of tolerance opens up
and says, well, you've locked
on somewhere. So I'm just
going to let you relax,
complete the selection. But if
you, if you didn't mean
it to be there, you
don't have to look too
far and we can break
this and try again. So
when people About people with
ALS, they usually come to
Stephen Hawking and he has
a unique voice because it
is the text to speech,
voice. I think, you know,
IBM used 20 or 30
years ago. And while there
are ways to make his
voice sound like his actual,
including the fact that he's
English and they've got him
sounding like an American people
associate that voice with him.
So he doesn't want to
change it. But I understand
that there's a thing called
voice banking. So if someone's
about to lose their voice
or might have an eventuality
to lose their voice, they
can record themselves. How does
that, So voice banking is,
it's what you say. It's
a process whereby you record
yourself speaking a number of
preset phrases and words in
one particular example, which is
a company. Again, I'd like
to plug called model talker
is model talker.org. They currently
provide a free service. So
you record yourself reading 10
phrases, send it in. They'll
tell you everything's good with
your setup. And then you
record 1600 phrases, which takes
hours and hours. But then
what they do is they
take that and they will
synthesize your voice and give
you back something that's compatible
with windows. I think it's
called SAPI five text to
speech. And then that becomes
available for windows to use
or programs like optica. Oh,
wow. So that is not
only a free service, but
what they're creating is very
standard thing. And it plugs
into that drop down. It
lets you pick the different
voices windows. Exactly. So you
can use your own voice
with something like windows, narrator,
which would probably be weird.
Cause you'd be talking back
to yourself the whole time.
But if you want to
use it with communication software,
something that I've heard from
a number of people with
motor neuron disease is that
your voice is very much
akin to your identity and
losing your voice is, is
a bigger deal than you
or I might think it
is. So it's, it's very
important and services like this
are just fantastic. So kind
of Closing, I'm curious, you
built this and you built
this and you worked for
for years and you worked
on the train. At what
point did you sit down
with someone with motor neuron
or ALS and showed it
to them at that first
time where they saw it
and tried it? I fought,
he late in the process.
If I was at work,
I'd be sacking myself for
a, for not engaging the
end users. I probably only
put it in front of
someone who was a prospective
user about six months ago.
And that was at a
local hospital where I was
put in touch with a
guy who's an ex software
developer. So he knows what
he's looking at. He was
excited to play with this
technology and he's just been
fantastic. So he's given me
great feedback on things he
likes about his current setup,
that he likes better than
my solution things he doesn't
like and things he likes,
you know, he'd like to
see and, and I've taken
these things away and tried
to build him his system.
So up until that 0.3
and a half years, it's
been my system. And now
it's now it's sort of
my system and Steve system.
And it, from the other
feedback I'm getting from the
wider community, people who know
what they're looking at, he's
really helped me along here.
Do you have a sense
now how many people are
using this? I mean, did
you succeed? Is this something
where you're getting an email
every once in a while
that says, this is it
you've changed everything. Yeah. I
wouldn't say I've succeeded because
it's not finished, but yeah,
I'm absolutely bowled over by
the response. I'm receiving emails
from people I go on
yesterday where someone just saying,
thank you, thank you. Thank
you. My mother hadn't spoken
in months. We've built her
this system. And you know,
the first thing she did
was right. I'm really enjoying
using this and she kept
hitting the speak button over
and over again. So she
could hear herself talking. That
sort of feedback is you
don't get that in a
day. Yeah, that's fantastic. Let's,
let's also take a moment
to, to thank some of
the open source projects that
you're using. So you've got
RX and the reactive extensions
underneath there. You've got my
apps, the Metro WPF library.
You're using Octa kit. You
got prism log for net.
The common service locator. You've
also got something called mouse
keyboard activity monitor. You're sitting,
you're sitting out, you're standing
on the shoulders of giants.
No, absolutely. I couldn't have
done this without years and
years and years of other
people's hard work. Yeah. It's
fantastic stuff. So people can
check this out@optikey.org  dot
org, and they can interact
with you, I assume, on
Twitter or in the issues
area. And I also, as
a, as a person who
looks at a lot of
open source, I have to
give you a lot of
credit for a really extraordinary
Wiki and bit of documentation.
So often people throw these
things up on to get
hub and say here's some
code, but I would aim
to say that you've probably
got is as nice a
Wiki and as nice a
group of documentation as any
open source project I've ever
seen. Thank you very much.
It's probably taken me as
long as the actual software
today. Well, it absolutely shows
and I hope that people
who are listening, perhaps if
you know someone who has
ALS or motor neuron, that
you spread the word and
also spread the word that
Julius is not alone in
this. He's got people helping
out, but largely this is
a one man deal. And
I'm sure that he would
appreciate the help the sponsorship
in any way at all
that, that you can thanks
a lot for chatting with
me today. Thank you, Scott.
This has been another episode
of Hanselminutes and we'll see
you again next week.